[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment."
This is your go-to show
that offers practical tips
from expert guests at the
end of each episode that
will help you be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
According to the National
Alliance on Mental Illness,
nearly 62 million
Americans suffer
from mental illness per year--
that's one in four adults.
The American Academy
of Pain Medicine
reports that more than 1.5
million people worldwide
suffer from chronic pain.
How are mental illnesses
related to emotional imbalances?
And how do neglected
and unprocessed emotions
contribute to diseases
like chronic pain, anxiety,
weight gain, and depression?
Today, my guest
is Sujatha Reddy--
an Ayurvedic practitioner
for more than 25 years.
Sujatha has a master's in
mental health counseling,
is a licensed
professional counselor,
and specializes in
Ayurvedic psychology.
She works with
individuals who suffer
from anxiety and depression
and are diagnosed
with a multitude of diseases.
Sujatha, thank you so much
for being here with me today.
>> You're welcome, Ashleigh.
I'm happy to be here.
>> Can you tell us a little bit
about Ayurveda as a practice--
for people who maybe you're
not familiar with Ayurveda.
And also, according to the
tradition of Ayurveda-- why
are we having such massive
disturbances in mental illness
and chronic pain in our
culture and society today?
>> Ayurveda is a holistic entire
system of medicine from India,
which is 5,000 years old.
And it helps us
understand who we are.
And how we need to live in the
rhythm of nature in balance
to maintain good health
in mind, body, and spirit.
>> So it's really
totally holistic.
>> It is very holistic.
And the reason we suffer today
from either mental or physical
illnesses is because
we are out of balance.
Out of balance with
our own constitution.
In Ayurveda, there are
three main constitutions
that are described.
It is called the vata,
the pitta, and the kapha.
And this stems from
the five elements
which are in nature, in
which the whole existence is
manifested from--
which is the fire, water,
air, aether, and Earth.
Every atom and matter also has
all of those five elements.
In our body, every cell is
made up of those five elements.
And so we really are not
different from the nature
and the whole
universal existence.
We are part of the whole.
And we are born with this
unique constitution--
depending on our
genetic makeup, you
could have either just a
dominant vata constitution
or a pitta constitution,
or a kapha constitution.
Or you could have a combination
of vata-pitta, pitta-kapha,
or the kapha-vata constitution.
The vata constitution has the
air and the aether element
dominant.
The pitta constitution has
the fire and the water element
dominant in it.
And the cover kapha
constitution has the water
and the Earth element dominant.
We do have all
five constitutions,
but these are the dominant ones.
And we are defined by the
dominant constitution.
Depending on our
dominant constitution,
we have certain tendencies
and certain imbalances
that we are born with in
our genetic blueprint.
>> So they're not that just
happened to us by the way we
live.
They're also part of how we
naturally come into this world.
>> Exactly.
And where were born, in terms
of a country, or regions,
or environment--
all those matter.
And even at the time of
conception, the mindset
and the health of
the parents matter.
So it becomes very important if
a child has to be conceived--
how they lived in balance
in their mind and body.
And that formation of the
fetus is all defined by that.
So our health depends
not just with us,
but with our parents
and our experiences
that we have had in
our past lives, too.
Those impressions are embedded
in our genetic protocols.
And when we live
life in balance,
you can actually postpone
those or completely eliminate
those genetic tendencies.
>> This is a big study in
science right now epigenetics,
and things--
>> It's called epigenetics and
we've been hearing a lot about
it.
>> Tell us a little bit more
about that and how it relates
to Ayurveda.
Because what I'm
hearing you say is
that, there's a lot
of different factors
that could cause us imbalance.
And it's kind of hard to think
like, oh, my gosh-- well,
maybe my parents were in
a really difficult space
when they conceived me.
Or my mom was sick
during pregnancy
and I've lived in really
stressful environments.
And it's kind of easy to feel
that there's so many factors
working against us
where maybe we don't
feel like we have free will.
Or we don't feel like
we have the power
to actually make change.
But with this study
of epigenetics,
it's actually
confirming what Ayurveda
has been saying for a long time,
which is by actually making
lifestyle choices, we can start
to reverse and change things
that we before, used
to think were not
possible to be changed.
>> You're so right.
Absolutely.
You are who your
grandmother was.
So what your grandmother
did in her lifetime
can affect the grandchild.
During pregnancy, it's
not about just the fetus,
it's also about the
ovaries of the fetus--
that everything is
transpired into.
And the granddaughter
inherits even a cancer gene
because of that.
If the grandmother was taking
hormones and unhealthy eating
and unhealthy lifestyle--
that can actually
cause a blueprint
to the grandchild,
not just the mom.
So it goes as long
as three generations.
By taking responsibility, by
having that knowledge today--
what we have is we
can change that.
If not for us, for
our next generation.
We can give them that
gift of living healthy
so it becomes so important
to live in this true self,
in this rhythm.
And eating healthy
foods, exercising,
and not putting
chemicals in our body.
And not getting
carried away with
a lot of foods that
are pushed on us,
which is completely not natural.
>> And let's talk about that
a little bit because one
of the things that you said in
the beginning is we learn to be
able to live in greater
connection with nature.
And that when we're not
connected with nature,
it's one of these reasons that's
causing us to be imbalanced.
And I can think of so many
ways that that's happening.
On the computers all the time.
Living mostly indoors.
Living in these big
metropolitan cities
where we can't even really,
actually see the sunrise
or the moon rise or set.
And we're constantly
around stimulation.
Like what you said-- we're
eating processed foods.
How do all of these contribute
to having mental illness
and chronic pain manifesting?
>> Everything what we are doing
today is a sensory overload.
When we say sensory overload,
it is through our five senses.
We are eating what we
are not supposed to eat.
>> And too much of it.
And we are hearing music
that the decibel levels still
unproportional levels.
And we are not actually
doing things in sync
with the nature, which
is especially the sun--
the day and the night.
The bio rhythm of the nature.
Everyday when we wake up,
we see that the sun is up.
The birds are up.
Why aren't we up at that time?
So the sun actually
is a metaphor
for how our metabolism
runs in our body.
When there is a
sunrise, it's not
very hot in the morning
and talking about doshas--
the elements-- the water element
is very high in the morning.
The fire element is low--
the energy is still low
when the sun is rising.
>> So we need to slowly wake up.
>> We need to wake up and then
slowly get into the rhythm.
And what happens is we are
not really hungry that early
in the morning.
So it takes at least
two hours for us
to even feel the hunger--
that's why we eat
a light breakfast.
And as we go on in the day, the
sun is at its peak from 11:30
to 2:30 or 3:00 PM--
that's when our
metabolism is very high.
That is when we are supposed to
eat the highest protein so we
can digest our food properly.
And during that time, we
should not be eating ice.
So you're actually going
to damper the fire--
the digestive fire-- and it does
not digest the food properly.
And the food only stays for
a limited time in the stomach
and it moves on.
As much as possible, we have
to enhance the digestion.
In Ayurveda, we don't
recommend drinking ice
water between meals and when
we are eating meals, actually.
>> Because it dampens
the digestive fire.
>> Yes, it does.
And especially, ice-- maybe
you can sip a little bit
so you can push the food down.
Drinking water is usually
after half hour of eating--
that's when your
food is well-digested
and then it moves on to the
duodenum and small intestine
for absorption.
And you're not actually
developing any toxins.
And if we do not
follow these rules,
then we are only
accumulating toxins,
which then is absorbed
and then moves along
our bloodstream and
manifests into disease.
Then you have
tendencies, especially
with your constitution--
>> So really, the same
type of imbalances,
meaning if we don't
get enough sleep,
if we eat at the
wrong times of day,
if we're not in
sync with nature--
all of these same
factors can actually
start to express themselves as
many different things based off
of our tendencies.
Meaning for one person,
the same kind of imbalances
may manifest as depression.
Where for another
person, the same causes
might actually
manifest as anxiety.
Correct?
>> Correct.
And not just the food, you're
also absorbing emotions, too.
There are impressions
that you have--
our body has this built
in survival mechanism.
What it does is when
there is danger,
it is going to warn you.
It is the amygdala--
the midbrain--
that really is built in
since thousands of years
ago when human beings in
the caves how they survived.
When there was danger, they
would either fight or flight.
It used to be wild
animals in those days.
>> Well, it's true.
And our body, our
physiology actually--
even though we've evolved
past really having
to be worried about wild animals
or be worried about being eaten
by a saber tooth tiger or
something along those lines--
but actually, our
physiology still
responds to those same potential
threats in the same way, right?
So if we're worried
about money--
I can't make my rent.
Or a job, my boss.
Or oh, my gosh, I need
to lose more weight.
Or oh, my gosh, I'm not
going to have enough time
to get this report in.
Those same types of
perceived dangers
cause that same type of
reaction in our body, right?
The same fight or flight.
>> Correct.
So these days, it's
not the wild animals.
It is all the other
dangers in the society,
in the environment.
Whether it is stress.
Whether it is artificial
foods or processed foods.
Whether it is toxic
relationships.
Whether it is toxic friendships.
It's all of that, that our--
there's a threat to
our body and mind
that it tells us in
the form of disease,
in the form of anxiety,
in the form of depression.
All of that.
And the happiness index and
the fear operated by fear
is so high that
people have become
so vigilant and so fearful.
They are living life in a very
subconscious, unconscious way.
And not really in
a conscious way.
Almost like victim
to our circumstances
and our environment.
So it's time that we
take responsibility
to understand and listen
to our body, first,
and see and go access that
deep calm space within us.
And really be vigilant about
what we put in our body.
And what we are actually
bombarding ourselves
with that we don't need to.
>> And one of the things
that I've always found
so fascinating with Ayurveda
is from PTSD, to infertility,
to postpartum, to perimenopause,
to anxiety, to depression--
in Western culture, we look at
these as being very individual
and separate different issues.
Where we have
specialists that need
to help with each
specific one as
if there were different
imbalances within each one.
But what's amazing
about Ayurveda--
how does this connect to the
collective consciousness?
So that when we start to
do some of this healing
within ourselves,
that we actually
are really healing everyone?
The collective consciousness--
all of our brothers,
and sisters, and ancestors
of humanity on the planet.
>> Yes.
We've heard about
environmental pollution.
And how much
everything gets dumped.
And how things get
imbalanced in nature.
We are hearing about the fires.
We are hearing about
the floods these days.
And all of those are the
imbalances of nature.
Again, you can classify them as
vata, pitta, kapha imbalances.
The same base--
nothing different.
What we do to our
own body that we
can cause imbalances of those
three doshas in our body.
And what can we do?
Of course, we have
to reduce pollution.
Not put toxins out
there in the environment
to protect our Earth.
Not just that, we
have to also see
how we are taking care
of us and the imbalances.
If there is a completely
kapha imbalance in our body,
then we are going to experience
respiratory problems, weight
gain issues, diabetes--
all of those tendencies.
Those imbalances and
diseases are caused.
In Ayurveda, a common theme
is like increases like.
And then opposites balance.
So when like
increases like-- say
you have a tendency--
you have a sweet tooth.
If you over eat and keep
eating those sweets--
we are going to develop
diseases with that.
And our constitution--
if we have
a kapha constitution--
a tendency is to
crave for sweets.
If we become mindful
about that and then say,
oh, this is my
body constitution.
I am not actually supposed
to be eating any of this.
Yes, I can taste
it a little bit.
We always need all
the sixth tastes
for our body to be in balance.
But the proportions change
from how much a vata person has
to eat of which taste and a
pitta person of which taste,
and the kapha person
of which taste.
Because each taste
has its own property
that has an effect
on our health.
>> And so really, what you're
saying is that we have to be
able to find our natural rhythm
and reside in our constitution
before.
If we think of mothers or
we think of relationships--
if we don't find that
natural rhythm and balance
within ourselves, if we
don't process our emotions,
give ourself enough time to wake
up to digest food and emotions,
to sleep enough--
then we're automatically
passing that off to others.
We have to stabilize
ourself, first,
to be able to make that help
with someone else, including
family members,
people around us.
So it's really about starting
to really understand ourselves.
And from there, we
actually have the ability
to see how we can help balance
things around us, as well.
>> Absolutely.
And when it comes to
emotions and stress,
there are people who can
take a lot of stress.
Stress is when the body is
not agreeing with what you do.
So loving what you do--
you can work hours and days on
end, you're going to be happy.
Stress is when your body
is not connecting to that
and it's not liking that.
So recognizing that and
being mindful, doing mindful
practices becomes
very important.
And what is palatable to you,
in terms of your environment,
your works, situation--
>> Knowing your threshold.
>> And knowing your threshold
as how much can you work?
What one person can do, another
person may not be able to do.
So we have to understand
each one of us are unique.
And what we can take on and
what we can not take on.
Some people like their own
space, like being introverted,
is good for them.
Some people love
being extroverted
and it's good for them.
>> And I think that's
an important point.
It's like we don't have
to change from that.
>> You don't have to change.
>> If you like to be introverted
and you need to be quiet
and have space in order to
feel like you have energy to be
in the world-- there's
nothing wrong with that.
>> There's nothing
wrong with that.
>> And if you get energy from
being out and moving around--
there's nothing wrong with that.
I think that's one
of the things we
see in our society
is everyone's trying
to fit in a particular mold.
But really, it's about
learning to deal with yourself
and give you what you need.
>> Absolutely.
And also, the
society is dictating
how an individual should look.
It's not about that.
It's about your constitution.
We have to be healthy according
to our own constitution.
It's not like we have to wear
a size two or a size zero.
It's about being healthy.
And a lot of mental health--
girls, especially,
are affected by this.
Teenagers developing
eating disorders.
Just not being comfortable
with their body image.
And being told that you
are fat or you are too thin
is not defining who
they really are.
We all have immense
potential to unleash.
The most important
thing is that we have
to be happy with who we are.
And we have to understand
how we treat this one
vessel that we're born
with just for this life.
We don't have to worry about
anything more than that.
>> I love that.
Sujatha, we talked
about so many things
and all these wide
variety of ways
to be able to help to
manage our emotions
and keep ourselves in balance.
Would you enlighten us with
a couple of really clear tips
that anyone can use?
Depending on their imbalance,
it doesn't necessarily
really matter that they could
apply some specific things
to their day to help
them remain in harmony.
>> In the morning
when you wake up,
give gratitude to the day
that you are awake today.
And decide how you
want your day to flow.
In front of the mirror,
check on how you're doing.
How beautiful you are.
During the day, when
you feel stressed--
take a deep breath.
Sit with yourself on the hour.
And you're going to be so
productive just with that.
Have dinner three hours
before you go to bed.
And when you eat, eat your
half stomach with solids.
One fourth of your stomach
has to be with liquids.
And the other one
fourth has to be empty.
So you're actually having
all the five elements
in the stomach for
the digestive process.
Sleep between 10:00 and 11:00.
And get a good night's sleep, at
least for seven to eight hours.
Just these few tips will
help you become more mindful
and fall into the
rhythm of your day.
>> Thank you so much, Sujatha.
Super helpful and I think
really appropriate for everybody
in our modern day.
>> You're welcome.
And thank you for having me.
>> Absolutely.
Thank you so much
for joining us.
I hope these tips
have been helpful.
And now, you have some new
tools for your daily life.
Until next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]